URL: https://artificialanalysis.ai/models/mercury-2-5
FINAL: https://artificialanalysis.ai/models/mercury-2-5
TITLE: Mercury 2.5 - Intelligence, Performance & Price Analysis | Artificial Analysis
FETCHED: 2026-09-24 06:43:47
============================================================
Artificial Analysis
Inception
•
Proprietary
model
•
Released
September 2026
Mercury 2.5 Intelligence, Performance & Price Analysis
Try it out
API Provider Benchmarks
Model summary
Intelligence
Updated
12
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index
2 out of 4 units for Intelligence.
Speed
780.8
Output tokens per second
4 out of 4 units for Speed.
Cost
In
$0.25
Out
$0.75
Cache Discount
90%
$0.06
Cost per Intelligence Index task
2 out of 4 units for Cost.
Verbosity
35M
Output tokens from Intelligence Index
2 out of 4 units for Verbosity.
Mercury 2.5 is below average in intelligence, but well priced when comparing to other models of similar price. It's also notably fast and fairly concise. The model supports text input, outputs text, and has a 260k tokens context window.
Mercury 2.5 scores 12 on the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index, placing it below average among comparable models (median: 12). When evaluating the Intelligence Index, it generated 35M tokens, which is fairly concise in comparison to the median of 85M.
Pricing for Mercury 2.5 is $0.25 per 1M input tokens (moderately priced, median: $0.25) and $0.75 per 1M output tokens (moderately priced, median: $0.91). On average, it costs $0.06 per task to evaluate Mercury 2.5 on the Intelligence Index.
At 781 tokens per second, Mercury 2.5 is notably fast (110).
Reasoning
Yes
This page shows the reasoning version of this model.
A non-reasoning variant may also exist.
Input modality
Supports: text
Output modality
Supports: text
Context window
260k
~390 A4 pages of size 12 Arial font
Metrics are compared against models of the same class:
Non-reasoning models → compared only with other non-reasoning models
Reasoning models → compared across both reasoning and non-reasoning
Open weights models → compared only with other open weights models of the same size class:
Tiny: ≤4B parameters
Small: 4B–40B parameters
Medium: 40B–150B parameters
Large: >150B parameters
Proprietary models → compared across proprietary and open weights models of the same price range, using a blended 3:1 input/output price ratio:
<$0.15 per 1M tokens
$0.15–$1 per 1M tokens
>$1 per 1M tokens
Highlights
Updated
Intelligence
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index · Higher is better
Speed
Output tokens per second · Higher is better
Cost per Task
Weighted average cost (USD) per Intelligence Index task · Lower is better
Intelligence
Updated
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2 incorporates 10 evaluations: AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2
includes:
AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
. See
Intelligence Index methodology
for further details, including a breakdown of each evaluation and how we run them.
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index by Open Weights / Proprietary
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2 incorporates 10 evaluations: AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2
includes:
AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
. See
Intelligence Index methodology
for further details, including a breakdown of each evaluation and how we run them.
Indicates whether the model weights are available. Models are labelled as 'Commercial Use Restricted' if commercial use is limited by conditions, and as 'Non-commercial' if the license prohibits commercial use.
Capability Indexes
Measures the performance of models on specific capabilities and industries
Artificial Analysis Finance & Accounting Index
Incorporates 7 evaluations: AA-Omniscience, GDPval-AA v2.1, AA-Briefcase v1.1, Humanity's Last Exam, AutomationBench-AA, AA-LCR v1.1, GDP.pdf · Higher is better
Benchmarks
Intelligence Evaluations
Intelligence evaluations measured independently by Artificial Analysis · Higher is better
See more
AA-Briefcase v1.1
Updated
Agentic knowledge work, (Elo-500)/2000
GDPval-AA v2.1
Updated
Agentic real-world work tasks, (Elo-500)/2000
AutomationBench-AA
Updated
Agentic SaaS workflows
Terminal-Bench 4.0
New
Agentic coding & terminal use
SciCode
Coding
Humanity's Last Exam
Reasoning & knowledge
GDP.pdf
New
Professional document reasoning, All-pass
CritPt
Under review
Physics reasoning
AA-Omniscience Accuracy
Knowledge
AA-Omniscience Non-Hallucination Rate
1 - hallucination rate
AA-LCR v1.1
Long context reasoning
Harvey LAB-AA
Legal agentic work, criterion pass rate
EnterpriseOps-Gym-AA
Agentic business operations
AA-AnalystAgent
Quantitative analysis on spreadsheets & documents
𝜏³-Banking
Agentic tool use
ITBench-AA
Kubernetes incident root-cause analysis
MMMU-Pro
Visual reasoning
MLCR-AA
New
Medical long context reasoning
While model intelligence generally translates across use cases, specific evaluations may be more relevant for certain use cases.
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2
includes:
AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
. See
Intelligence Index methodology
for further details, including a breakdown of each evaluation and how we run them.
AA-Briefcase v1.1
Updated
AA-Briefcase Elo
AA-Briefcase v1.1 is an agentic knowledge work benchmark developed by Artificial Analysis. AA-Briefcase Elo is a combined metric that aggregates rubric pass rate, analytical quality Elo and presentation Elo · Higher is better
AA-Briefcase Elo is a combined metric that aggregates analytical quality Elo, presentation Elo, and rubric pass rate, with rubric performance converted into Elo via synthetic head-to-head matches. Elo and 95% confidence interval bounds are clamped at 0.
AA-Omniscience
AA-Omniscience Index
AA-Omniscience Index (higher is better) measures knowledge reliability and hallucination. It rewards correct answers, penalizes hallucinations, and has no penalty for refusing to answer. Scores range from -100 to 100, where 0 means as many correct as incorrect answers, and negative scores mean more incorrect than correct.
AA-Omniscience Index (higher is better) measures knowledge reliability and hallucination. It rewards correct answers, penalizes hallucinations, and has no penalty for refusing to answer. Scores range from -100 to 100, where 0 means as many correct as incorrect answers, and negative scores mean more incorrect than correct.
Intelligence Index Comparisons
Intelligence Index vs. Cost per Intelligence Index Task
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index · Weighted average cost (USD) per Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index task
Most attractive quadrant
Pareto line
Weighted average cost per Intelligence Index task. Each evaluation’s cost is calculated from input, cache hit, cache write, reasoning, and answer token prices, divided by task count, and weighted by its Intelligence Index weight.
Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index v4.3.2
includes:
AA-Briefcase v1.1, GDPval-AA v2.1, AutomationBench-AA, Terminal-Bench 4.0, SciCode, Humanity's Last Exam, GDP.pdf, CritPt, AA-Omniscience, AA-LCR v1.1
. See
Intelligence Index methodology
for further details, including a breakdown of each evaluation and how we run them.
Token Use
Output Tokens per Intelligence Index Task
Weighted average number of output tokens used to run one task in the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index
The number of tokens required per Intelligence Index task. This is calculated by multiplying the output tokens per eval by the relative weights of each benchmark in the Intelligence Index, then dividing by task count (excluding repeats).
Cost
Cost per Intelligence Index Task
Weighted average cost (USD) per Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index task, segmented by token type. Lower is better
Weighted average cost per Intelligence Index task. Each evaluation’s cost is calculated from input, cache hit, cache write, reasoning, and answer token prices, divided by task count, and weighted by its Intelligence Index weight.
Cost to Run Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index
Cost (USD) to run all evaluations in the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index
The cost to run the evaluations in the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index, calculated using the model's input, cache hit, cache write, reasoning, and answer token prices and the number of tokens used across evaluations (excluding repeats).
Pricing: Cache Hit, Input, and Output
Price (USD per M Tokens)
Price per token for cached prompts (previously processed), typically offering a significant discount compared to regular input price, represented as USD per million tokens. The values shown here are the cache hit price; cache write and cache storage are billed separately and vary by provider — see "Cache pricing by provider" for detail.
Context Window
Context Window
Context window: tokens limit · Higher is better
Larger context windows are relevant to RAG (Retrieval Augmented Generation) LLM workflows which typically involve reasoning and information retrieval of large amounts of data.
Maximum number of combined input & output tokens. Output tokens commonly have a significantly lower limit (varied by model).
Speed
Measured by Output Speed (tokens per second)
Output Speed
Output tokens per second · Higher is better
Tokens per second received while the model is generating tokens (ie. after first chunk has been received from the API for models which support streaming).
Figures represent performance of the model's first-party API or the median across providers where a first-party API is not available.
Time per Intelligence Index Task
Weighted average decode time (minutes) per task; excludes TTFT and overhead time · Lower is better
The weighted average time (seconds) per Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index task. This is calculated by dividing output tokens per task by output speed, weighted by the relative weights of each benchmark in the Intelligence Index.
Latency
Measured by Time (seconds) to First Token
Latency: Time To First Answer Token
Seconds to first answer token received · Accounts for reasoning model 'thinking' time
Time to first answer token received, in seconds, after API request sent. For reasoning models, this includes the 'thinking' time of the model before providing an answer. For models which do not support streaming, this represents time to receive the completion.
End-to-End Response Time
Seconds to output 500 tokens, calculated based on time to first token, 'thinking' time for reasoning models, and output speed
End-to-End Response Time
Seconds to output 500 tokens, including reasoning model 'thinking' time · Lower is better
Seconds to receive a 500 token response. Key components:
Input time: Time to receive the first response token
Thinking time (only for reasoning models): Time reasoning models spend outputting tokens to reason prior to providing an answer. Amount of tokens based on the average reasoning tokens across a diverse set of 60 prompts (
methodology details
).
Answer time: Time to generate 500 output tokens, based on output speed
Figures represent performance of the model's first-party API or the median across providers where a first-party API is not available.
Frequently Asked Questions
Common questions about Mercury 2.5
Mercury 2.5 was released on September 8, 2026.
Mercury 2.5 was created by Inception.
Mercury 2.5 scores 12 on the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index, placing it below average among other reasoning models in a similar price tier (median: 12).
Mercury 2.5 generates output at 780.8 tokens per second (based on Inception's API), which is well above average compared to other reasoning models in a similar price tier (median: 110.3 t/s).
Mercury 2.5 has a time to first token (TTFT) of 2.91s (based on Inception's API), which is somewhat higher than average compared to other reasoning models in a similar price tier (median: 2.22s).
Mercury 2.5 costs $0.25 per 1M input tokens (better than average, median: $0.25) and $0.75 per 1M output tokens (better than average, median: $0.91), based on Inception's API.
Mercury 2.5 costs $0.25 per 1M input tokens and $0.75 per 1M output tokens (based on Inception's API). For a blended rate (7:2:1 cache hit/input/output ratio), this is $0.14 per 1M tokens. Pricing may vary by provider.
Compare provider pricing
When evaluated on the Intelligence Index, Mercury 2.5 generated 35M output tokens, which is better than average compared to other reasoning models in a similar price tier (median: 85M).
Yes, Mercury 2.5 is a reasoning model. It uses extended thinking or chain-of-thought reasoning to work through complex problems before providing an answer.
Mercury 2.5 supports text input.
Mercury 2.5 supports text output.
No, Mercury 2.5 does not support image input. It can only process text.
No, Mercury 2.5 is not multimodal. It only supports text input.
Mercury 2.5 has a context window of 260k tokens. This determines how much text and conversation history the model can process in a single request.
No, Mercury 2.5 is proprietary. The model weights are not publicly available.
Mercury 2.5 is a proprietary model and Inception has not disclosed the model size or parameter count.
Mercury 2.5 achieves a score of 12 on the Artificial Analysis Intelligence Index. This composite benchmark evaluates models across reasoning, knowledge, mathematics, and coding.
Yes, Mercury 2.5 is available via API through 1 provider.
Compare API providers
Mercury 2.5 is available through 1 API provider.
Compare providers