URL: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2026/09/05/the-revolt-of-the-reader
FINAL: https://bcantrill.dtrace.org/2026/09/05/the-revolt-of-the-reader/
TITLE: The revolt of the reader | The Observation Deck
FETCHED: 2026-09-07 00:59:23
============================================================
Reading is important to me. While I’m not a quick reader nor an especially
voracious one, I have found that long-form reading has had a profound influence
on me over my life.
And because reading is important to me, writing is too: writing not only allows
us to convey our ideas, but the very act forces us to test and distill them — at once making our ideas more robust while providing the vehicle by which to
share them.
But I am writing this now because — speaking as a reader — we are
exasperated: too many people — people we otherwise like and respect! — are
writing (or otherwise putting their name to) pieces that are
clearly
LLM-authored
. We readers are left with pointed questions for those promoting
LLM-authored pieces: do you think readers can’t tell? Or do you think readers
don’t care?
To answer the first question, readers can absolutely tell. To those who read
broadly, the hand of the LLM is so clear it’s as if
the writer’s intellectual fly is open
.
In fact, it’s
so
jarring that I have to
believe that those writing with LLMs are either not reading enough to see the
LLM’s obvious structural tells — or (and?) they aren’t even reading their own
content. (A confession: with particularly egregious pieces, I have fantasized
about sentencing the author to read them aloud, certain that they themselves
will be unable to endure the slop that they are foisting upon the rest of us.)
As to the second question, readers emphatically care. In fact, the tells of
LLM writing are so grating ("and here’s why that framing matters!") that our
brains pull an LLM-triggered ejection handle, bailing us out mid-sentence in an
act of self-preservation. And the first person plural there is deliberate: as
Cynthia Dunlop writes
,
of the 668 developers that replied to her survey, 78% "stop reading
immediately" when they detect an LLM. And there are consequences that outlast
the piece: 71% of the respondents in Cynthia’s survey
also
"avoid the author
in the future" (!!). Revealingly, the respondents are not after linguistic
perfection, but rather authenticity: 98% reported preferring an author’s own
(imperfectly) written piece over an LLM-polished one. Finally, be wary of
dismissing Cynthia’s respondents as a self-selecting group: active readers on
social media are
exactly
the folks most likely to repost or otherwise promote
writing they like — the early adopters and the tastemakers of online prose.
Why do people have this reaction? Beyond having to endure aggravating
stylistic tics, when reading a piece that has had substantial LLM assistance,
we — the readers — don’t know what is real and what isn’t. As I wrote in
RFD 576
,
to use an LLM to write is to void the social contract between writer and
reader: we readers shouldn’t be expected to labor to understand a sentence that
the writer themselves didn’t work to create.
Does the revolt of the reader matter? If it needs to be said, when you are
using an LLM to author a public piece, you are no longer writing for yourself
or to otherwise pressure-test your own ideas — the
only
purpose is to
serve the reader. If readers choose to ignore you (perhaps forever!), you will
have undermined yourself: instead of attracting readers you will be actively
repelling them. So other judgement about its use aside, using an LLM will
increasingly become simply…​ ineffective.
In this regard, I am reminded of the arc of e-mail spam. There was a time in
the early 2000s when people were (reasonably!) afraid that the explosion of
spam would mean the end of e-mail. This was an era largely before social
networking, and e-mail was the canonical killer app of the Internet; that we
were losing e-mail to spam felt deeply dispiriting. But sometime in the late
2000s, we turned a corner: spam filtering improved so much that the
economics
of spam were undermined. Moreover, as spam became effectively contained, the
consequences of being labeled as spam became increasingly dire. Today,
legitimate businesses are very careful about how they use bulk e-mail; to be
labeled as spam is to effectively destroy your domain name and tarnish your
brand.
The war on spam started to turn when we could identify it at scale; could
something similar happen to LLM-authored writing? Like spam, an LLM’s
influence is readily identifiable to humans reading it; surely this is a
solvable problem?
Up until somewhat recently, the results on this problem had been decidedly
mixed. I had tried to use LLMs themselves for LLM identification, but I found
that their false negative rate was
far
too high: they were chipper in
accepting stuff that I was certain was LLM-authored. Other services seemed to
look for basic LLM tells, but as an avid (and unapologetic!) user of the
em-dash, these superficial techniques make me shift nervously in my seat (and I
found them to be so broadly unreliable that they didn’t earn regular use).
Late last year, Pangram Labs launched
their Pangram 3 model
. I
found it to be a huge leap over other detectors, and became an avid user.
Importantly, over months of use (and especially on samples that I otherwise
knew the origins of), I found its false positive rate to be very low: when
Pangram identified a text as being largely AI written, I could say with some
certainty that an LLM was heavily involved. (I found its false negative rate
to be higher than I would like, but it was a small price to pay for a low false
positive rate.)
A little over a month ago, they introduced
Pangram 4
, which I found to
be a step-function improvement over the already-impressive Pangram 3: in my
experience it has an astonishingly low false positive rate
and
low false
negative rate (which is to say: very high accuracy!). I am finding it to be so
effective (and the loss of trust in voices that use LLMs to be so precipitous)
that I recently extended RFD 576 to be
explicit
about public writing
, specifically mandating that public Oxide writing be
reported by Pangram as human-authored. As I explained in the RFD, the standard
for our public writing is not merely that LLMs aren’t used to write, but that
readers
have the confidence that it’s not LLM-authored — and increasingly
that means being Pangram-clean. For those organizations that value the
authenticity of their institutional voice, I would encourage the adoption of a
similar policy for those writing under their banner. (Looking squarely at you,
Rust Foundation
!)
Indeed, Pangram has become important to so many of us that I was thrilled when
Pangram Labs co-founder and CEO
Max Spero joined us recently on
Oxide and Friends
.
I would recommend
that discussion not only for the technical details of Pangram, but
also for Adam’s drop of a pitch-perfect (if underappreciated in the moment)
Simpsons
reference: when I likened LLM-authored writing to presenting takeout
food as one’s own cooking,
Adam quipped
that such
writing is like "steamed hams", making reference to
Principal Skinner trying to pass
off Krusty Burgers as an old family recipe
. Beyond the apropos reference, it
was interesting to hear Max’s insight into what has made Pangram 4 especially
effective — and why its efficacy seems to evince some
suspicious howls of protest
.
So, writers beware:
readers are in revolt.
You should fully expect your
writing to be run through Pangram. If your position is that we should be fine
with an LLM crafting prose from your prompt, spare us all the wasted cycles and
just give us your prompt. Or, better yet, consider doing what generations of
writers have done before you, and treating that prompt as a skeleton that you
use to write your piece yourself! This doesn’t mean that an LLM can’t help
you, of course — 
LLMs are superlative editors
! — just that you probably shouldn’t let it write it for you if you actually expect
the rest of us to read it.